INTRODUCTION. xlix

vires, the majority have bilis, which being coarser, is not less
likely to be genuine. At x11. 92, the corrector and all the
other MSS. but one have operatur festa· P. or his original did
not see that Janua was the nominative, and so introduced an
impossible plural to agree with festa At xur. 28, P. has nunc,
which is flat, but needs no explanation, and looks like a cor·
rection of the difficult nona, which is supported by the variant
nova, though this last must be later than nunc, as dating from
an age when prosody was sorgotten. At v. 208 P. has saeua
voluntas, probably an inaccurate reproduction os scaeva voluntas,
which is a perverse attempt to improve on sala, the reading os
the great majority of MSS. Lastly, P. has not retained the
original order ol xv. and xva, and its reading Junca at xv. 27,
looks very like an attempt to improve metre at the expense of
history.

Though these instances may tend in some measure to
prove that P.'s archetype was not written with unisorm fidelity‚
Ι have not the least wislr to set aside the judgment of such
scholars as Jahn or C. F. Hermann on its general superiority.
Perhaps it would be too much to say that the defects of
Pithou’s MS. illustrate the uncertainty of the guidance which
the best scholars are compelled to trust, and that C. F. Her-

mann's old corrector may sometimes have had better materials
than his critic.

 

